+++
title = "For individuals"
description = "Individuals can find many ways to develop their skills and contribute to CodeRefinery."
aliases = ["lessons/contributing/", "organization/get-involved/", "organization/how-to-help/"]
+++

As individuals, there are plenty of ways to join CodeRefinery, regardless of
what you do now.  Also see what [professional staff](@/join/staff.md)
supporting a local community and [organizations](@/join/organizations.md) can
do.

For any of these, you can get started by [joining a
meeting](@/join/meetings.md) and say hi, or [join our
chat](https://coderefinery.github.io/manuals/chat/) and introduce yourself in
the "#new members" stream.  Or contact anyone you know for a recommendation on
how to get involved - we aren't that formal yet.  If you've been sent this page
as a "help out at this workshop", that will tell you who to contact.


{{ div(attributes='class="uk-child-width-expand@m uk-margin-large-top" uk-grid') }}

{{ div() }}


## As a learner

Anyone may attend our workshops, and this is a great way to get started.  If
you want to do more than just attend, join our chat and give feedback during
the workshop.


## As a team leader

Even during your first workshop, you could register as an exercise leader and
help a team of others.  This is actually not that hard, and you aren't expected
to know everything, instead you focus on keeping a good flow and welcoming
environment.  There are other expert helpers to help you.  If you are
comfortable enough with the pre-requisites, aren't too scared by error
messages, and can call for help when you need it, then you can do it! We have
some [basic on-boarding
training](https://coderefinery.github.io/manuals/team-leaders/) for you!

Maybe you want to bring all the rest of your research group as your team?


## As a co-instructor or expert helper

We don't teach alone, and thus it's remarkably easy to get started as an
instructor!  In fact, we almost recommend it as a starting point, since it's
good to have a co-instructor who understands the difficulty of doing and
learning the topics. Joining as co-instructor means that you will be in touch
with other instructors. It is great learning and a necessary step to call
yourself "CodeRefinery instructor".

If teaching isn't for you, you can help by supporting learners and team leaders
during a workshop.  If you like reading about how we work, see the [roles
overview](https://coderefinery.github.io/manuals/roles-overview/) for all the
varying responsibilities in a workshop (surely there is something for you
there).


{{ enddiv() }}

{{ div() }}


## Lesson contributions

We would love to see more contributions to our lessons. We are a normal open
source project on GitHub, and you can contribute via issues, pull requests, or
by discussing in our [chat](https://coderefinery.zulipchat.com/).  You are
welcome to [reuse our lessons as well](@/lessons/reusing.md).

A good starting point is to either open a topic on our
[chat](https://coderefinery.zulipchat.com/) or to open an issue on one of the
lesson repositories in our [GitHub
organization](https://github.com/coderefinery) where you can describe what you
would like to change to collect feedback and possibly also contributors.

No contribution is too small and ideas for changes are very often very good
ideas and we would love to work with you on making our lessons better and more
modular and even more relevant.


## Help out the CodeRefinery project itself

As an open project, there are always things to do to keep us running!  We're
especially interested in people who know how to grow a community, do better
communications, or manage many events better than we do now. [On this
page](@/tasks.md) we list the many tasks where you can join and contribute.


{{ enddiv() }}

{{ enddiv() }}
