+++
title = "Research Software Hour"
slug = "2020/04/24/rsh"

[extra]
authors = "Radovan Bast, Richard Darst, Stefan Negru"
+++

CodeRefinery is a project that holds workshops, but computing is an
experience.  As much as we teach in workshops, it's not enough: these
workshops are hands-on, but still can't show our whole daily thought
process. They also aren't the right format for everyone and can't
reach enough people at once.  In order to extend our reach, we are
trying a streaming web show [Research Software Hour](https://researchsoftwarehour.github.io) that combines
the spirit of CodeRefinery with real-life examples from our daily
work - and hopefully, some entertainment, too. We hope watchers
experience the *spirit of research software and computing*.

We knew that there had to be a way to reach more people, so considered
streaming and decided to do it together: it's more fun and more
engaging for the audience, we can discuss, ask each other questions,
show each other new tools we discovered, learn from each other,
hopefully teach the audience some.  We will certainly be learning a
lot from the audience, too.

We wish to show why we enjoy research software and computing and how
you can, too.  **This is an interactive show, and a big part is
answering your questions.  We encourage you to submit your own codes
and scripts and repositories which we can constructively review on
stream.  You'll get positive ideas and everyone will benefit.** We are
not experts in everything and will also show you the errors we make
and how we get through them and also critically review our own codes.

We are starting this as a two-person project (Richard Darst from Aalto
University, Finland, and Radovan Bast from UiT the Arctic University
of Norway, both working as part of the CodeRefinery project).  This is
an open source production - anyone can help us develop Research
Software Hour, too.  There are many different ways to contribute, from
streaming to developing material to community building.  Join us with
questions, answers, ideas, code!

Read more at [the website](https://researchsoftwarehour.github.io/)
and join us each Tuesday at 20:30 CEST on Twitch.
