+++
title = 'Learner teams in courses'
slug = "2022/11/28/teams"
description = "Teams can provide high-quality interaction even in large courses."

[extra]
authors = "Richard Darst"
+++

*Part of a series on the [Future of
Teaching](@/blog/2022-10-17-future-of-teaching.md)*

In April/May 2020, when we started doing "large" (~100 people) online
courses, we wanted a way to be more interactive.  This was before the
time of [co-teaching](@/blog/2022-10-31-co-teaching.md) and
barely at the start of [parallel
chat](@/blog/2022-10-24-parallel-chat.md), so we were focused
on the personal experience.  Our solution was **learner teams**.

## How it worked

The basic mechanics was this:
- Learners are grouped into teams of ~5 people each.  (We try no more
  than 6 people that don't know each other already, if a team already
  knows each other then we take whatever size they came with).
- Each team has an **exercise leader** assigned to it.  It might be
  someone who separately volunteered, or it might be someone who is
  already part of the group.
- Teams are pre-assigned and static over the entire workshop.  This
  takes more work, but means that a community forms - randomly
  assigning teams each day would *not* work as well.
- There are lecture parts, and there are exercise parts.  During the
  exercise parts, everyone is moved to a breakout room.  The exercise
  leaders work with their team to do the exercises and in general be
  friendly.
- We have other course staff around ("expert helpers") and they rotate
  between different rooms and make sure the expert helpers are doing
  well, if they need any help, and if they are keeping a safe and
  welcoming course environment.

We have a short [~1-hour training course for the exercise
leaders](https://coderefinery.github.io/manuals/exercise-leaders/),
where we try to motivate their value, give hints on promoting
interaction, hints on what happens if things go badly, and especially
about motivation of learners and safe learning environments.

We would encourage entire groups to sign up together as a team.
Research has shown that when two people (instead of one) learn some
new skill, it is much more likely to be adopted by a group.  This is
the natural extension of that, and it becomes very easy to take entire
groups into a course.

For exercise leaders, detailed knowledge about the course material
wasn't needed, exercise leaders could come by and help with that.  The
more important role of the exercise leader was social: being able to
keep everyone engaged and make sure that no one felt left out.
Knowing a little bit about command line interfaces and not being
scared of reading error messages is a nice bonus, but not strictly
needed.


## Evaluation

Teams worked great for us to scale to ~100-120 people.  We could have
one instructor per lesson with plenty of staff to support the teams.
We could scale up the number of people we could teach at once much
more than the traditional 3-instructor model in a classroom.

In principle, this is a lot like "work tables in a classroom".  In
some ways, it wasn't as nice since it was online.  But in other ways,
screensharing can allow everyone to see the active screen - something
not easily possible with this sized groups in a classroom.  Everyone
had a clear team, and exercise leaders were clearly responsible for
the people on their teams - which meant that fewer people were at a
table but not really participating in the group.

When teams already knew each other, it was even better.  Often, one
team member had more experience and became the exercise leader.  These
teams which knew each other in advance worked exceptionally well.


## Benefits

Teams allowed us to scale to an even larger number of people.  Our
registration was: "We take people up to the capacity of exercise leaders we
have.  However, we take any team that comes with their own exercise
leader, even if we are over our basic capacity".  This worked well.


## Decrease of teams with the rise of livestreaming

By 2022, the roles of teams has been decreasing.  Our developments in
[co-teaching](@/blog/2022-10-31-co-teaching.md),  [parallel
chat](@/blog/2022-10-24-parallel-chat.md), and
[livestreaming](2022-11-14-livestreaming-courses.md) allows us to
break free of the limits of zoom.  Co-teaching provides engagement
without needing two-way communication, parallel chat allows a way for
everyone to ask questions at the same time, and with that
livestreaming goes bigger than even the team-based approach.  In our
recent attempts at teams, even when we provided an in-person team room
with staff, there were very few attendees.  After spending large
amounts of time setting up the teams, this was a bit disappointing.
Still, this doesn't discourage us overall - if people find the mass
communication to work better, that's fine!  We can be available for
those who want something else.  Thus, or latest strategy is
"livestream for the masses, teams for those that want them."


## Downside: amount of organizational work

The biggest downside is the overwhelming amount of effort needed to
assign and manage teams.  The more work done to make good teams, the
more effort needed, and it almost needs a full-time person to manage
it.  This means we need to re-think our registration to make it more
sustainable in the long-term.


## Summary

In summary, teams allowed us to make a more interactive and engaging
course than many others could online.  It's similar to how tables
organized themselves in groups in classrooms, but by putting more
attention to the arrangement, we could ensure fewer people were left
out than in-person.  Yet, practical difficulties and the benefits of a
livestream strategy mean that teams have a less central role than they
used to.



## See also

* [CodeRefinery manuals: Exercise
  leaders](https://coderefinery.github.io/manuals/exercise-leaders/)
* [Expert helpers and their role in helping exercise
  leaders](https://coderefinery.github.io/manuals/expert-helpers/)
* Series index: [Future of Teaching](@/blog/2022-10-17-future-of-teaching.md)
