+++
title = 'Co-teaching and scaling up'
slug = "2022/10/31/co-teaching"

[extra]
authors = "Richard Darst"
+++

# Co-teaching

So you are trying to teach a large online course.  Everyone knows this
will be boring and monotonous, right?  What if we told you that our
large, online, livestreamed courses feel more interactive than our old
small in-person courses?  Part of that is due to the parallel chat
(LINK), but a significant part also comes from co-teaching, the topic
of this article.

The basic idea is that we accept that the audience is probably going
to be quiet, and plant someone to interact with the instructor.  This
person doesn't pretend to be a student, but directly acts as a
co-instructor and the course becomes a discussion between them.  This
is different than having two instructors who alternate teaching, or an
instructor or helper.  It's more like a pilot-co-pilot situation,
where both pilots have a certain focus, but the flying is a continual
team process with both providing information to each other.

Doing co-teaching in practice requires some care, but isn't that hard.
There are different models, usually we try to designate a primary who
is going over the course material, and the other co-instructor acts as
a learner, asking questions and engaging by being the "voice of the
audience".  The co-instructor who isn't most actively talking spends
some time watching the HackMD and raising these questions.  During
demo times, one common strategy is that one person is guiding and
explaining the big picture and the other person is typing and
explaining the small picture.  Whatever happens, it works.  And
usually very well.

Besides the much greater interaction, there are other benefits.  It's
much easier to onboard a new instructor - one can almost go straight
from advanced learner to co-instructor, since "asking questions a
learner might have" is enough to start.  Co-teaching also reduces the
stress of preparation: the instructors still have to prepare, but
with two people, by simply pausing or asking a question to the other
person, any gaps can be filled in.

Perhaps the biggest disadvantages are the need for more people and to
coordinate.  But, there is probably less preparation total needed.  It
requires more staff, but we need a continual flow of instructors
coming in anyway - so this helps us long-term.

What's the minimum size course where this makes sense?  In theory, it
could work for very small courses, but at that size you would probably
hope that the audience interacts directly.  At a few tens of students,
it might work, if you can keep the co-instructor discipline working
well - but that might easily be forgotten if there are many questions
from the audience.
