+++
title = "CodeRefinery Mastodon account"
slug = "2022/11/08/mastodon"
description = "CodeRefinery has started a Mastodon social media account."
+++

For the obvious reasons, CodeRefinery is looking into a Mastodon
account.  You can now find us at
[@coderefinery@fosstodon.org](https://fosstodon.org/@coderefinery).

We will try to mirror to both, at least for the time being.  If anyone
has ideas about how balance the two, please let us know.  We will have
the CodeRefinery account follow other staff and interesting people
related to CodeRefinery's mission, so if you are looking for other
interesting people to follow to seed your network, check that out,
too.

Mastodon is part of a federated social network, open source, and not
under the influence of big companies - just what we should be
supporting more of.  Interested in joining yourself?
- <https://mastodon.help> gives a basic introduction of the how and why.
- To join, you choose a server that you feel comfortable in, and they
  all communicate.  We chose <https://fosstodon.org> to focus on the
  software and technology side of things. For others in academia or
  research, <https://fediscience.org/server-list.html> is a very nice
  list of other interesting servers.
- You can follow anyone regardless of their server, but the server you
  choose might affect what you see in the local timelines (and it's
  easy to move later if you want).
- When in doubt, just join somewhere that looks reasonable - don't let
  the Paradox of Choice hold back progress!

If you are just joining, you can start out by following CodeRefinery -
copy `@coderefinery@fosstodon.org` to your search and follow it.  You
may be interested in following some of the people that we follow to
seed your list.

We hope to see you there!
