+++
title = "Reverse hybrid teaching"
slug = "2022/11/07/reverse-hybrid"
description = "'Reverse hybrid' is instructors remote, students local - possibly spread among different locations in small groups."

[extra]
authors = "Richard Darst"
+++

*Part of a series on the [Future of
Teaching](/blog/2022/10/17/future-of-teaching/)*

In 2020, we went to remote teaching.  In 2022, we are talking about
hybrid so that we can keep accessibility benefits of being online,
while returning to some of the benefits of interaction.  But does this
work?  There are plenty of issues with hybrid, mainly the inequality
of the people in-person and those who are remote.  What can we do
about this?

We've found a surprising solution which we call **reverse hybrid**.
Surely others have thought of this, and maybe there is even a proper
name.

Let's do a thought experiment in a large course.  There is one teacher
and hundreds of students.  What's the benefit to students doing this
in-person?  It's probably not being in the same room as the teacher,
since most students don't have time to ask a question, or even
approach the teacher after the course.  The benefit is how students
can interact with each other beside the lecture.  The downside is that
making good, accessible online material in a lecture room is hard.

I wouldn't quite say it's accidental, but we have started this reverse
hybrid strategy: the teachers are online, and students can be
in-person in small groups.  We started this by encouraging students to
meet up with their friends or colleagues to work on exercises, while
we teach online.  As things became more relaxed, we had some staff
organize official in-person exercise sessions - while the current
instructors kept teaching online.  This has worked surprising well -
students who want interaction can get it (and actually interact,
without disrupting the whole course), and those that don't can still
attend no matter where they are.

But what do we lose?  Do we lose interaction with instructors?  As the
previous blog posts have shown, no!  When you get to these large
courses, students can't interact with instructors without technology
anyway.  In-person interactions aren't as anonymous, so doesn't
motivate all learners to be active.

And what do we gain?  The course isn't bound to one location,
literally anyone in the world can attend.  There are high-quality
materials that everyone can review afterwards, so that the audience
has the time to relax and interact.  By being able to scale up, we can
have more staff, which allows us to interact more via parallel chat or
co-instructors.  It's even possible to go as far as we go and make
each course an international collaboration with local breakout rooms,
and plenty of staff to manage everything.

Is "reverse hybrid" for everyone?  Clearly not.  I think it could work
for small courses too if a teacher really promotes the use of
technology to make interaction, but it might feel a bit weird - though
I think it's worth trying!  I think the biggest advantage is that it
allows you to scale up in a way that you are *no longer have to teach
alone*, which is a mindset change more than anything.

In practice, does it work?  In several cases where we had a structured
in-person session, it has worked well.  We know of cases of groups of
friends or colleagues joining together to watch and do exercises for
each of our courses, but we don't have a way to say just how many.  We
do have a report of it not working so well - because the online
interaction dominated the in-person interaction.  But is that really a
negative about in-person, or an overwhelming message about how
engaging our online courses are?
