+++
title = "Community call meeting minutes"
+++

# CodeRefinery community call

:::info
- Date: **Monday, October 4**, 12-13 CEST / 13-14 EEST
- Invited: Everybody welcome
- Session chairs: Radovan Bast
- Participants: SR, RB,JH, NT, RD, DI, LP
- This document: https://hackmd.io/@coderefinery/community-call
- Theme: workshop planning for 2022
:::

Meeting minutes are archived at https://coderefinery.org/about/community-call/


## Agenda

- Funding application result
- Planning of 2022 workshops
  - Not only "traditional" CodeRefinery workshops but also more topical workshops
  - Also related workshops planned by associated communities
- How to improve the format of these community calls (frequency, topics, engagement)
- Suggestions for better arraning streams on https://coderefinery.zulipchat.com/
- Suggestions for next community call topics


## Funding application

- Result: https://neic.no/news/2021/10/01/2021-open-call-results/
- Proposal: https://coderefinery.org/about/reports/open-call-2021-proposal.pdf
- Evaluation report: https://github.com/coderefinery/coderefinery.org/pull/573


## Planning of 2022 workshops

- CodeRefinery workshops (6 half-days):
  - Spring 2022: Tue-Thu on dates 22-24, 29-31 March
  - Autumn 2022: Tue-Thu on dates 20-22, 27-29 September
- Planning document for 2022 workshops/events: https://hackmd.io/@coderefinery/Workshops2022
- What else is on the radar?
  - The sooner we define and announce dates, the easier it is for other events and organizations to adapt and the hopefully easier it is to engage co-instructors and exercise leads
- Instructor training 2022
    - April ?

- EMBL course (contact: bio-it@embl.de)
    - Hybdrid model
    - EMBL members Participate as helpers / learners in the CodeRefinery workshops
    - Tentative period: first half of 2022

- Sustainability
    - Recognition to trainers/contributors is central for sustainability
    - Might institutes (such as EMBL) contribute to the project as partner? In terms of funding, recognition or contribution to the lessons (relevant: CodeRefinery funding is for coordination, not teaching)
    - How to deal with the problem of workshop organisation? People's commitment decreases with time.
        - Easier if organisers are not trainers

- If host institutes wants customized courses of CR team member, should we provide that ? this will help with the inkind.
    - Possible progression for someone joining the community: learner, team leader, expert helper, co-teacher, organizer.
    - What are the steps at the institution level?
    - Some institutes might prefer to pay instead

- How can we get more recognition for external in-kind work and how can we encourage more in-kind work to "pay back" for hidden work (example: Python course)



## How to improve the format of these community calls

- Is the frequency (once in 2 weeks) too high?
  - RD: these meetings should be *the* primary CR meetings.  Two weeks is about right, they should be coordination and discussion times.  Coordinating between workgroups, like speaker is saying now.
  - RD: but also there could be more frequent management meetings (open to everyone but not required, used to push admin stuff forward).  Then, say, monthly broader meetings like these.
- Focus the community calls for community building, listening to the community
  - suggestions were made to make these monthly to not create too many meetings in addition to task group meetings and topical meetings
- Rename after October?
  - 'CodeRefinery meeting'?
    - but if they should be about community building maybe they should not be renamed
- How can we make these meetings more interesting to attend and contribute to?
  - How can we give them more value for everybody?
  - LP: The Carpentries have the participation to community meeting as a requirement to join the community. I think this is a good way to ensure constant influx of new people (and ideas) into the community - and this becomes a motivation to join also for people attending often. However, this requires a formalised onboarding procedure.
- Bigger meetings for big announcements and big decisions
- One risk of trying to make all decisions as democratic as possible is that it slows down everything and increases
  meeting frequency.
    - Alternative is to try to separate the small decisions from the big decisions (not always easy) and transparently document the smaller
      decisions which may then need to be taken by few persons only


## Suggestions for better arranging streams on https://coderefinery.zulipchat.com/

(we ran out of time to discuss this question)

- How can we arrange them better so that information is easier to find but also unwatch without reading everything.
- Future of `core team` stream? After Oct 2021 we probably do not need a staff stream but do we need a private stream at all then?



## Suggestions for next community call topics?

- The Carpentries membership in the "CodeRefinery Sustainability"


---

:::info
### How to archive meeting minutes

- Send PR towards https://github.com/coderefinery/coderefinery.org/blob/main/content/about/community-call.md
- In a second commit adjust this page: https://github.com/coderefinery/coderefinery.org/blob/main/content/about/meeting-minutes.md
- There is no automatic HackMD-GitHub link yet. We can set one up but we do need to link to individual sessions to make browsing easier for those who don't want to inspect GitHub diffs.
:::
