+++
title = "Staff meeting minutes"
+++

# CodeRefinery staff meeting

[![hackmd-github-sync-badge](https://hackmd.io/saJtV2axTSKgXHrD7X6JfA/badge)](https://hackmd.io/saJtV2axTSKgXHrD7X6JfA)


:::info
- **Date:** 2021-07-05
- **Chair:** SN
- **Minutes taker:** SN
- **Present** SN, RB, JH, DI, NT  
- **When:** 12:00 CEST / 13:00 EEST
- **Where:** https://uit.zoom.us/j/65070953679 
- **This document**: https://hackmd.io/@coderefinery/staff-meeting
:::

## Next meeting

- 2021-07-19, July 19th, NT


## About this document

- Visibility: 
    - We write so that it can become public.  
    - Everybody who has the link during the meeting can edit. Otherwise logged-on users can edit.  
    - The minutes need to be reviewed and approved by the end of the meeting. 
- All paid staff is invited to this meeting and expected to attend (unless vacation, sick leave, scheduling conflict).
- No copying of items or entire documents.
- Newest items on top in each category.
- 2-3 assigned chairs instead of entire-team-rotation.
- Chair assigns the task to document conclusions for each item before moving on to next.
- Syncing with GitHub: either we save one file per meeting or one commit per meeting.


## Tasks (in progress or unassigned)

- [ ] [DI] Workshop, 2021 May - retrospective, document prepared and link shared
    - [x] Richard's notes from the coordination HackMD and Zulip in [this HackMD](https://hackmd.io/@dianai/lessons-learned-May-2021)
    - [ ] DI fixes categories and polishes the document more. Pls. add any comments/suggestions at the top of the document.
    - document tasks what other persons can contribute so that we can move it futher
- [ ] [JH, RB] organize meeting/open house to finalize the workflow for getting citable lessons in August.
    * Half-day event to be organized
    * Everyone who contributed (github) will be added as contributor. 
    * Then we ask each contributor if they want to be an author.
    * Release “idea”: get both source + rendered in zenodo with one DOI for each release.
    * https://docs.readthedocs.io/en/stable/versions.html
    * Also installation guides and manuals should be released and citable (they are very useful also and were a lot of work and are being reused in places)
- [ ] [RB] Draft governance board and onboarding procedure
- [ ] [RB] Draft document showing different options we could organize a celebration event - when is the best time to have it?
    * what is the format online or in person ?
    * celebrating the end of the whole project or May workshop ?
    * 1-page document summarizing options and let people vote/comment
- [ ] [RB] Finalizing the payments for paid workshops (there are some deadlines!) - June 30th ?
    * RB is waiting for an input from the payer side
- [ ] [NT, RB] De-Google Drive work
   * work started and data move in progress
- [ ] [RB (for inititiation)] Draft "lessons learned" document from project
   * produce a lesson's document learned from the project
   * after a draft is produced other memembers should contribute
- [ ] [RB] Secure some follow-up for GitLab service
- [ ] [RB] Update meeting invite to be 1 hour instead of 30 mins
- [ ] [all] Prepare for autumn workshop
   * think of the date, October ?
- [ ] [NT] Processing pre-/post-workshop survey to prepare for the 1) talk at RDA Nordic (Aug 30) and 2) final report (may involve others as well later) (2021-03)
- [ ] [NT, RB] Connect to a md file in the coderefinery.org repository of CR GH account and make a meta file 
- [ ] [RB] Schedule 1-1 calls with everybody about tasks to get better balance
 

## Decisions

Decisions made in the meeting should be listed with the item-number.  

>Ex.
>- 2021-MM-DD: An example decision in one-two sentences >and possibly link to more context, (related item->number).

- 2021-07-05: Pre-/post-workshop survey will be processed for the talk on the 30th Aug at RDA Nordic and for the final report (see the task as well) (2021-03)
- 2021-07-05: RB to schedule 1-1 talks with everybody about task assignment and optimal task tracking since everybody prefers different ways to track items and we don't seem to agree on 1 solution that works for everybody. (2021-02)
- 2021-07-05: Meeting minutes for each meeting saved as commit history of a single file in github.com/coderefinery/coderefinery.org (2021-01)


## Discussion items

Each new discussion item gets a number. It is OK that the same item may be discussed in several meetings. Please add items that you would like that we discuss.


### 2021-07-05

- [ ] 2021-04: Future of freshdesk and post-processing of feedback
  - Will we continue using FreshDesk?
    - The issue is that it is not really GDPR-complyant, but we do not have a better option right now. Any sugestions for a replacement?
  - Postprocessing of feedback received during FreshDesk emails:
    - RB has collected and annonymized them and they are in CodeRefinery HackMD (one document). Feedback from all previous workshops is on Google Drive.
- [x] 2021-03: Pre- and post-workshop survey: status and next steps. This data will be central to our reporting and also help RB preparing the talk at RDA Nordic (August 30; see "Information").
    - it would need what FAIR means, we have data on technique and tools and data how they changed their work after attending a workshop
    - usage statitistics can be a starting point for a Nordic survey/overview
    - help is needed so data can be made presentable on the coderefienry website
- [x] 2021-02: Task clarification for the rest of the current project period. (ref. [minutes from 2021-06-21](https://docs.google.com/document/d/19KfHyGEH9_ZDbcmwq6EhQHJfKmV0taJgadjCam3KKP0/edit#heading=h.8diefinqvirx)"Administrative challenges for remaining months"). Should we revive the issue board? Or use the website? Or can we just use this document in future (top section) for tracking tasks?
   - due dates may help 
   - 1-1 talks about task assignment and optimal task tracking 
- [x] 2021-01: How to keep the meeting minutes for each meeting; 1) as commit history of a single file, or 2) by pushing to a new md file at each meeting.


### Freshdesk Support

RB watching support line until we organise next event.


## Information

- Webinar "RDA Nordic - FAIR research software" on August 30: https://rda-software-webinar.readthedocs.io/en/latest/. RB will give a 10 minutes talk about our lessons learned and survey results.


## Done tasks

>Ex.
>- [x] Example task that is done
