---
layout: master
include: content
title: "git-pr: painless small pull requests"
permalink: /blog/2020/09/29/git-pr/
---

*2020-09-29 - Richard Darst*

# git-pr: painless small pull requests

In CodeRefinery, we teach the benefit of small changes via pull
requests in order to have better collaboration and review.  But, when
the changes get small enough, the time it takes to run the commands
and open the pull requests begins to get annoying.  I looked around
for other tools that could make this faster, but wasn't quite
satisfied with anything.  So, I slowly started making something that
evolved into git-pr, <https://github.com/NordicHPC/git-pr>.

Let's talk about how it works.

## Making a change

First, git-pr will help you to make the new feature branch.  `git pr
branch $branch_name` willcreate a new feature branch off of the
upstreamdefault branch and check it out for you.  You might want to
`git fetch` first.  Make your commits off of this branch.

One trick I use is to write the first commit's message like I would
write the pull request description.  I decided it's usually not worth
writing a separate description for the pull request itself.  Perhaps
there is some advantage to including the PR message in the git history
itself, too.

Then, to push the pull request, I use `git pr open`.  This will push
the current branch, and open a pull request on both Github and Gitlab.
It will pop up an editor pre-seeded with the commit's message for you
to further edit.  Once you save and close, the pull request is made.

One thing that git-pr will do is figure out the upstream and your
local copy by yourself.  Default upstream goes in priority order
`upstream`→`origin`, Default personal fork goes in the order
`local`→`origin`→`upstream`, so no matter if you first clone the
upstream, or your own fork, you can always add the other with only one
command and have it auto-detected with no renaming.

`git pr prune` will remove all merged branches both locally and on the
remote (possibly dangerous!).

Various `git pr fetch*` commands will fetch pull requests into a local
`pr/NNN` branch.

There are various other small useful things, with it, but this is the
main part.

These are *only* shorthands for things you can easily do with other
git commands, but they save you time.  It gets me closer to the ideal
of making many small pull requests.


## About git-pr

You can find it at <https://github.com/NordicHPC/git-pr> - it is a
single shell script to copy to your path.

It's beta-quality software: it is used by me and a few others all the
time, but there will almost certainly be issues as others start using
it.  Send issues and PRs!

It supports both Github and Gitlab, though Gitlab support is less well
tested.

There is a lot of prior art on different pieces here, there isn't much
in git-pr that is completely new - In particular, the GitHub command
line interface has come out since then and has some overlap.  You can
see other options in the git-pr README.
