---
layout: master
include: content
title: "Why remote work is great"
permalink: /blog/2021/01/01/remote-work-advantages/
---

Most posts about remote working are on the disadvantages.  But there
are many advantages, so much that some of us dare to call the last
year *amazing*.

We realize we are very privileged to be able to take advantages of
this: many people really suffer during these times.  But, most of
thees disadvantages are related to other things being closed or
not being able to adapt too much.


## Work with anyone, anywhere

Before remote work, we could most easily communicate with the people
in the same office, so they got more collaboration attention, even if
they aren't exactly doing the same as you are doing.  With remote
work, all distances are the same: My first observation was that the
CodeRefinery network became much stronger, and instead of mostly
working more alone, suddenly I had more of a team together.

There are also no physical boundaries to our events: we are getting
rid of some of our focus on major cities.


## Mixed modes of taking part in events

RD: One criticism I have heard is that online, you can't have as
free-flowing conversations because of voice latency.  But I have
noticed the opposite: I've actually been more active in meetings.
Why?  Because there are now more ways to take part.  Having a text
chat and/or collaborative notes allows normally quiet people to say
things without interrupting anyone else.  We can get reactions and
discuss that way in parallel to the voice stream, which brings a lot
more people in.

But we can do more.  Meetings should be more explicit about welcoming
chat contributions.  Someone should be in charge of watching the chat
and relaying any important comments or questions via voice.

For teaching, questions via chat isn't manageable (if you don't answer
right away, it's gone, and if you do, it's soon gone anyway).
Instead, we take questions via collaborative notes, which we have some
people dedicated to answering (and again, bringing up important
questions via voice).  The notes become a chat where you can answer to
old questions.  You can ask a question, and come back after the
session to see the answer.  See [CodeRefinery HackMD
mechanics](https://coderefinery.github.io/manuals/hackmd-mechanics/)


## More learner collaboration

I always thought it was hard to get high-quality collaboration in
groups for in-person courses: we can try to encourage it, but in the
end, it always seemed like existing groups worked together, but few
new groups would form.  When we went online, cleverly using breakout rooms


## Easier to get people involved in teaching

We don't have to be limited by the number of people willing to give up
other tasks and come to our classroom when we have a course.  Instead,
it's easy for many people to drop by our online lecture quickly when
they have some time. Our number of instructors and helpers per
workshop has gone way up, which reduces our load.  Since travel isn't
necessary, our instructors can specialize a bit more.


## Co-teaching

RD: Because we can (supported by the tools above), I feel less
isolated when teaching.  It is easier to get a co-teacher to help with
me, in one of several styles: a) make the course a discussion between
the teachers (effective but requires work), or b) lecturer + audience
watcher.  It's easier to get multiple people to help me make
materials.  I've even gone so far as to say **I'm done teaching things
alone**.

## More teaching feedback?

I have heard that online doesn't have as much feedback from learners
to teachers.  If you are teaching alone, that may be true, but
personally I never got much out of seeing nodding heads and people not
most answering my questions to the class.  Instead, I focus on
teaching, and my co-teacher watches the audience and my lesson and
tells me how they are getting along.  This is far more valuable
feedback than trying to get a few people to answer questions.  In
order for this to work, you need to use some of the other ideas such
as breakout rooms, comments via chat, etc.


## Real time and recorded learning mixed

One of the things we tried was mixed Zoom/streaming via Twitch.  We
did get some Twitch viewers, but the most significant benefit was a
surprise to us: Twitch saved the stream for two weeks, which allowed
our learners to go get an instant review later in the day, in case
they missed anything.  Anyone who might have gotten behind or missed a
day has an opportunity to catch up.  Since we had to make a clean
(privacy-preserving) stream anyway, there is little cost to enabling
this mixed learning.


## Take part in events with less investment

For an in-person event, either you attend or you don't.  If you do,
you have to arrange your whole schedule around it, so you have to be
already quite invested in the event, which isn't the best way to
attract new people.  But online, there is a smaller threshold for
attending: if the organizers don't exclude you, you can watch without
being an active participant, while still mostly focusing on some other
work.

RD: The term [lurker](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lurker), or
"non-active participants", refers to participants like this, who
listen but never contribute anything.  You may think this is a bad
thing, but I was surprised when I read that article several advantages
were mentioned: the thing that most comes to mind is learning
community norms before becoming an active part.  In fact, this is how
I got involved in open source communities in the first place: I lurked
on mailing lists for a long time and then de-lurking.  Lurking is a
safe way to allow people to see if our events are for them.

To do this better, we need to acknowledge we will have lurkers, make
it easy for them (while not affecting other participants), and welcome
these kind of participants.  Then, we work on ways to de-lurk people.

This requires a change of mindset from "private meetings" to "people
can watch us", but for many events that is a good trade-off.

The downside here is this can also contribute to overload, and doing
too many things at once (more on this below).


## Work when you want

One of the problems when I first started remote work was *you can work
anytime you want* not separating home from work life, resulting in
working all the time.  This isn't good.  But after some time, I
realized this is equivalent to *you can **not** work anytime you want*.
Feeling tired/bored?  Just do something else!  Since you don't have to
physically there, you can take a few hours break in the middle of the
day, and if someone needs you, they can still ping you and you can
come back as needed - so that you break doesn't have to slow someone
else down.

I've settled into a general pattern where I do collaborative work
during the normal workday (plus whatever else I can fit in), but then
stop early and do my focus work late at night, when it suits my
cycle.  It takes discipline and self-awareness, but everyone can find
their own cycle.

## Invest in yourself

RD: I was happy to take the excuse to invest in myself some: improve
my workspace, get some important equipment for home, and so on.  Since
we have to work from home, there are possibilities for tax breaks for
this.  The cost of our time is small compared to the cost of
top-quality equipment, so

Not everyone has this opportunity, but I really think this "invest in
yourself" will have long-lasting effects.


## More interaction

RD: This may be surprising, but my team was distributed before and our
interaction went up when going to online.  It also went up with our
users: we transitioned to a "daily garage" time, where we were online
in a meeting, and users could drop by and ask any questions (before,
this happened once a week, in a physical room).  If people came, we
helped then (in breakout rooms if necessary).  Otherwise, we had an
hour to talk and coordinate among ourselves, and we can learn from
other answers as well.  As described above, one can also attend
passively while doing other things.  In short, we can even better
interact and coordinate when we are online.


## Disadvantages

When we moved to online, there were many conferences and other events
that became available to everyone.  This is great, but the downside
is there was almost no reason to say no to an event.  This leads to
doing too many things, including the horrible practice of "attending
multiple meetings at once".  We should be more explicit about saying
"no", and using some of the other strategies above to avoid going to
events which we really don't need to.

Not enough breaks.  In real life, you have to move around when you
go to meetings and talk to people.  Online, there is this bad
practice of quitting one meeting and joining the next immediately,
taking away any possible chance to move around some between events.
RD: **I propose that xx:50--xx:00 becomes a personal time that no
meeting or online event may use**.  If everyone does this, you always
get short breaks, and they match up with others in your home so you
can chat together a bit.

"The best way is always the way it used to be done".  For example,
people investing in better location rather than more space for their
homes.  Having to work from home upsets that balance, and thus many
people just can't adapt.  Hopefully most of the pain comes from things
such as childcare being closed, not the working from home part.


## Risks when going back to the old way

RD: At least my university (even while advertising online meetings in
2019) has had a long period of arranging our spaces so that they
aren't suitable for online meetings (mainly, throwing people in big
offices where you can't talk without disturbing others).  I really
don't see how we can keep the advantages of online events.  At least I
can do it if I keep working from home, but not if I go back to work.
I am very curious how we can make it work, and know we need to give
some serious consideration to this.


## Summary

Yes, there was a lot of pain to a lot of people when moving to online
work.  But there are so many advantages, which hopefully we can keep
in the future.
