
CodeRefinery (http://coderefinery.org/), launched in the autumn of 2017, is a project which aims to establish a scientific software development e-infrastructure coupled with necessary technical expertise and extensive training activities in order to address the growing needs of computational communities. It is a project within the Nordic e-Infrastructure Collaboration (NeIC), which in turn is an organisational unit under NordForsk.

The training aspect of CodeRefinery focuses on teaching how to efficiently use state-of-the-art tools and practices for modern collaborative scientific software development. Standard CodeRefinery training events are in the form of three-day workshops involving interactive demonstrations, live coding exercises and type-along types of presentations. A diverse range of topics are covered, including collaborative distributed version control, automated testing, documentation, Jupyter Notebooks, CMake, integrated development environments and how to manage code complexity. All course material covered in the workshops are open source and available on the project´s GitHub page, https://github.com/coderefinery. Most participants are Ph.D. students or postdoctoral researchers from various scientific disciplines, ranging from mathematics and computer science to the physical and biological sciences, engineering and psychology. The ultimate goal of these workshops is to help researchers write modular, reusable, maintainable, sustainable, reproducible and robust software, regardless of their academic discipline, programming experience or preferred programming language. 

As a further step towards assisting research groups to migrate from ad hoc in-house software development solutions to state of the art collaborative infrastructures, CodeRefinery has deployed a web-based source code repository platform for Nordic research projects which offers free unlimited hosting of private repositories. The platform features components for issue tracking and integrated code review and will, in the near future, be connected to a continuous integration platform to automatically build software and test code changes. To sign up for this service, visit https://source.coderefinery.org.

The CodeRefinery project will continue to deliver three-day workshops during the coming years. A list of planned future workshops in 2017 and 2018 can be found at http://coderefinery.org/workshops/. In tandem with delivering these workshops, CodeRefinery organizes half-day or one-day events focusing on either training in one particular topic or on general seminars and discussions, bringing together researchers, software developers, CodeRefinery members and application experts. In this way, CodeRefinery aims to contribute to building a Nordic community of users and developers of research software, as well as providing an environment for those people to communicate and exchange their expertise. 

Anyone interested in attending any of the CodeRefinery events can get the latest news on the project’s website, http://coderefinery.org/, or follow @coderefine on Twitter. Furthermore, CodeRefinery recently launched a web forum where researchers from Nordic universities and research centres can ask questions and take part in discussions on software development topics. To join this forum, visit https://groups.google.com/group/coderefinery. 
